# Conclusion

Figure 2 shows stable quasi-periodic movement in the double pendulum's low energy state (10°, 5°). The figure's organized shape is known as a Lissajous curve, which has applications in knot theory and demonstrates relative stability of the system. Even though RK2 and RK4 slightly differ from each other, they stay within their own Lissajous curves. In this state, the double pendulum has fixed, predictable motion. Both of these show that double pendulums are not necessarily chaotic at small energy states. 

At larger energy states (100°, 90°) however (Figure 1), double pendulums tend to be chaotic. In the phase space, this is represented as an unorganized curve with no sense of stability or predictability. Even though RK2 and RK4 had the exact same initial conditions, they diverged greatly from each other over time, demonstrating chaos in contrast to Figure 2. Euler was excluded from the graph due to it being highly inaccurate and altering the scale of the axis.

The accuracy of RK4 is reinforced by Fig. 3, where the total energy of each method is plotted over time. Euler showed the most divergence from the initial total energy with RK2 showing less divergence and RK4 showing near-zero energy divergence. Conservation of energy laws state that the total energy of a closed system will always stay constant. This illustrates that RK4 demonstrated the most stability when simulating the double pendulum, which was why it was the chosen numerical integrator for simulation.

Upon observation of Fig. 6, small “islands” of stability and chaos are present. They can be seen as patches of black and color. Specifically, the “islands” of stability represent certain cases of order among chaos that exist within the physical limits of the system. As of this point in the development of science and mathematics, there is no method to analytically determine exactly where or when an “island” will appear. Although there are equations and numerical integrators to describe and simulate this chaotic system, there are still lots of uncertainties and discoveries yet to be made for chaos theory as a whole. 

Observations from Fig 4 demonstrate that the masses diverged from state variables with a negligible initial difference of 1e-8 degrees. This shows that small adjustments to the initial conditions resulted in massive differences, a key characteristic of chaotic systems. In addition, the graph can be displayed on a semi-logarithmic scale, where the slope of the linear regression line would demonstrate the Lyapunov exponent. The Lyapunov exponent is the exponential rate of divergence between two systems with different state variables, and was calculated to be 1.314 for m₁ and 1.267 for m₂ for the high energy system. The positive Lyapunov exponent values quantify chaos as numerical values, where positive exponents are defined as chaotic and near zero or negative exponents are defined as stable and not chaotic. They are the main way chaotic systems can be quantified clearly. 

Observations made from Fig 5 reveal different values of θ₁ and ω₁ whenever θ₂ was zero and ω₂ was positive. Essentially, this represents a 2 dimensional slice of a 4 dimensional space. Poincaré sections of quasiperiodic systems show organized, elliptical structures similar to Fig. 5b. The elliptical shape represents a slice of a 3D torus that is defined by energy constraints of the system. It is highly structured because the motion of a low energy double pendulum is very similar to the motion of two coupled harmonic oscillators. However, the Poincaré section is not completely accurate due to small energy fluctuations as a result of the numerical integrator used. An ideal Poincaré section is expected to have an infinitely thin elliptical outline. In contrast, a chaotic system will show a more random assortment of points like in Fig. 5a. At high energies, the constraints of the system break down, leading to a less structured appearance. Instead of the points residing on a certain path, they tend to “fill the area” of a certain space. In addition to the relative structure of each system, both appear to be generally symmetrical across the vertical axis. This is because the pendulum tends to spend the same amount of time on each “side,” especially for long periods of time. 

Overall, chaos shows that deterministic changes do not always mean predictable changes. Despite knowing the equations that govern the system are completely deterministic, we cannot always know the exact state that it will end up in. In other words, long term prediction is impossible with such a system, limiting our knowledge of possible outcomes. Chaos provides a technical explanation for the uncertainty of such a complicated system. Additionally, it allows scientists to know what can and cannot be predicted, and make better systems based on that information. Overall, this project shows that you don't need a complex system to get complex, seemingly random behavior. 


